Morning.
Thank you so much. We have half an hour with you, so if you would like to start
by some
opening remarks, that would be great, and then there will be questions from
members. Thank you.
Thank you. It's a pleasure to be here.
We thought that we would open by sharing a little about
REANNZ, if that was appropriate, and deal with that.
REANN have the privilege of chairing REANNZ,
and we're very proudly
providing the underlying infrastructure and technology
across an incredibly important part of New
Zealand,
mostly research, education, and we add
innovation to that. And of course, the underlying science sector with
newly formed PROs,
heavily engaged with that community as well.
But why don't I pass over to Amber, who's the CEO, and get
Amber to give you a more in-depth
overview, and then we are, of course, in your hands in terms of
questions and where you'd like to take the discussion.
Thank you.
Thank you, Helen. I thought I would just bring REANNZ to life
for you. We are a small entity that often sort of goes
behind the scenes, just the nature of what we do.
So I thought I'd just bring our work and our mission to life.
So our strategic intent is to be the enabler and connector
for the research, education, and innovation sector.
Now, we do that by being part of a global ecosystem of similar
organizations doing exactly the same thing.
So there's 120 other countries around the world that have what's called
an NREN, a National Research and Education Network.
We all work together in a federated model that's based on the
concept of reciprocity. So there's no contracts, but we all work
together to enable global research, education, and innovation.
We do that in two broad ways. First is we run a
specialized high speed, low latency network.
And to bring that to life, because I realize there's a lot of sort of buzzwords in
that statement, when
a normal internet provider runs their cables, they fill the
cables with as much traffic as they can because that's how you get return
on your investment. For an NREN, we're paid by our
members and our funders to keep our networks empty.
So if you look at our traffic profile, we've got a lot of empty capacity and a
little baseload traffic down the bottom.
Now, that is done deliberately by design to enable huge data
files to go from one end of the world to the other.
So if I use an example of Niwa or Earth Sciences as it is
now, they regularly send huge climate change data models to the
UK, and those are too big to go on normal internet networks.
So they traverse REANNZ,
which has the headroom. We hand them over to our US colleagues, which also
have headroom, and then they hand it over to the UK colleagues who have a similar
headroom. So we all need to work together to make this happen.
If one of us did run their network differently, you wouldn't get that ability to
move huge amounts of data around the world.
So that's our fundamental infrastructure.
And then on top of that, we have a lot of platforms and services that
enable people to also connect and move around the world as well.
And some of these are fundamental global services underpinning
research and education. If I think of eduroam, which is federated
Wi-Fi, that was used 8.4 billion times last year globally.
So we're a small entity locally, but we're part of a bigger whole,
and it gives us the ability to leverage
capability and experience from overseas and bring that to New
Zealand to upskill ourselves and to enable us to offer more
services to the sector.
Great. All right. So are you okay if we start with
questions now? You finished your... Yeah. Thank you.
Members, questions. First question from Ruben Davidson.
Yeah, look, thank you very much. And
I'm assuming that you're coming in on our network today as opposed to
yours.
We are, yes.
That would explain some of the issues with it because it is probably running at
capacity.
On that network question,
and network reliability, in your report, it notes that you
didn't meet the target. So I was just curious, and I
should probably acknowledge that it's by a relatively small measure that you
didn't. But
I guess the first question there is why you didn't, what you
think the cause is for that.
Mm-hmm.
And then what you think the impact on member experience is as a
result.
Sure. Let me just bring up the target here.
We didn't meet it, and that was because...
Just getting it from the report. That was because there was a
mistake in the SPE, so actually was human error on our side.
You were talking about
the
packet delay variation target. So we missed it by--
So the target was less than .01% of hourly measurements across the core network
have a certain amount of packet delay.
And we missed it because we actually had incorrectly recorded
the measure in our SPE. We recorded it as less than
.01 and actually was less than .1, so actually
we did meet that.
So we did meet what we were aiming to meet.
It was an error. The impact if we were to meet that, so the
reason that target is really important is it's about quality of data
transfer. So if you think of huge packets of
data or even files, so medical imaging and the like, you don't want to
lose any bits of that transfer through the process because then the quality
of the file at the end is less than ideal.
So that is why these targets are so important, and that is why we focus on
itSo forensically, so to speak.
Sure. So just a sup on that, and
especially given that it was
human error in reporting or-
Mm-hmm
... measure monitoring. How
are you monitoring and reporting on that?
So if it's underperforming-
Yeah
... how do you pick up on that? What are the systems that you've got in place for
that?
Yeah, absolutely. So
networks produce a huge amount of data. It's called flow reporting.
And we run that through our systems, and we apply an algorithm which
allows us monthly to check the performance levels.
That algorithm's been checked by the auditors.
So the first time we got the new auditors in, they spent a lot of time with our
technical teams looking at the math and understanding how that worked to make
sure that it was a realistic and a valid
target that we were reporting against.
Great. And just one final sup on that, and just to pick up on your earlier point
about the reciprocal relationship you have with other countries
Mm-hmm
How does it compare as a rate to equivalent or any
other
of your partners?
It's varied. I couldn't tell you exactly, but the conversations
we've had, because they don't report publicly, not everyone does,
we're really similar to the US backbones, the big backbone networks,
and I would say the more mature countries that operate in NREN.
When you start getting into some of the smaller third world countries
like Asia or bits of Africa, it's a big achievement just for them to
get a stable connection. So it does vary.
But the big ones like Australia, US, the UK, a lot of the
European ones, that would be comparable.
Cool. Thank you.
Very good. Next we go to Dr. David Watson.
Hi. Yeah, look, thank you for your work, vital in our innovation
infrastructure as well as education.
What do you perceive or see are the weaknesses in our
network?
So
in our network, you're talking about within REANNZ scope?
One of the-
Yes
... yeah, one of the things
that we're asked to do is around resiliency.
So through this global ecosystem, we have very strong global
resiliency because we have lots of alternative paths, and we help each other out if
something goes wrong.
Nationally, the only weakness we see, and
we've been talking about this a lot, it's a low likelihood, but the
big weakness for New Zealand is we've got
three cables between the North and South Island, and the international cables go
out from up in north, which you'll probably be aware of.
There is a risk, obviously, if there was a big fault and you
lost that connectivity between the islands, then you've effectively cut off the
South Island. So that would be the one thing we're seeing, and
our members at the bottom of the South Island are really
interested in any of those conversations when they come up about potential
connectivity from Dunedin and Invercargill across to Australia.
Thank you, Amber.
So that's something we'd be interested in.
I have one supplementary, but I just need to declare an interest.
My job
just prior to coming here was advisor to DataGrid, which is the
one that I think you-
Oh, right. Okay, that's what I'm referencing.
And the transnational network that they were looking at.
Mm-hmm.
So my next question is, you're shifting large amounts of data, big data,
and that's completely important, but we're going to
actually have to crunch the data, and at the moment, as I understand,
these large amounts of data, we maybe don't have the capacity to do it
here. So my question is three related things around our
capacity to do the processing and our sovereignty,
data sovereignty-
Mm-hmm
... IP, et cetera.
Yeah, and you're right, they're two different questions.
So if you look across the ecosystem in New Zealand, there's a
range of
capability available for people to process their data.
So REANNZ runs a high-performance compute.
All the universities have their own.
And we use
other entities like Earth Sciences Compute.
But when you start getting really large volumes,
that is where we're looking overseas at the moment.
So the benefit of the networks is the ability to move big
data offshore if need be.
So we are talking actively to Pawsey, which is a supercomputer
center in Perth,
and they've got huge amounts of GPU, CPU, and access to
quantum. So we're looking at trying to bring that online for the sector in the
next three months or so.
So that is available to leverage, those opportunities are available to leverage.
The sovereign question's a really interesting one.
There is a need that's emerging, and the sector haven't quite landed on
this, but for GPUs at scale to reflect
sovereign data sets, and obviously we've got
sovereign Māori data, we've got governmental IP data.
And one of the challenges that some of the universities have as well is they don't
quite know what's in some of these data sets, so you obviously take a risk-averse
approach, choose to process it
in country as well.
So it is a gap. We are working with GDDA
on ways that we might be able to fill that gap.
Awesome. Thank you, Amber.
All right. A supplementary, Robin Davidson.
Yeah, just
exploring further on that sovereign data question.
Mm-hmm.
How
do you get an assurance if
things are going to be going offshore?
Mm-hmm.
What does that assurance model look like?
And particularly then in the context of Māori data
sovereignty, who are you providing that assurance to?
So what we'll do is with these contracts, we
will have a clear statement so people are aware where the data's going.
If it's going to another country, you can never 100% guarantee, right?
You can just talk about what the facility states and what the laws of the
country is.
If it's Māori data sovereignty, we are really open to people
about where it's being processed.
So for example, when REANNZ took over management of the
high-performance compute from 1 July, we went and
talked to several Māori-led research groups who were using Mahi Wika,
and we talked through what that meant to sovereignty,
what REANNZ being a Crown-owned entity meant to sovereignty and the
benefits of it. So that was how we leaned into it.
Does that answer your question?
Yeah.
It's basically a case-by-case basis, and we're transparent.
We're also looking at using AI concepts such as federated
learning,
which are designed to support sovereignty.
So what that process does, you
run a process on distributed datasets.
So that could be a dataset owned by an iwi and managed by an iwi,
and all you're passing back to the center, wherever the center happens to be,
is the result of that query. The data's not actually leaving
its normal place of rest. So we're looking at those
services to really help answer that question as well.
Yeah, great. You've said yourself you can't be
100% certain once it leaves, so are there
places that you wouldn't send it to?
And
is there a percentage below 100 that you wouldn't drop to?
Would you be comfortable with 80% certainty?
No. Remember, the data is the ownership of the
research program, not REANNZ, so it comes to the
individual researcher and research program. We don't actually own datasets.
We move them from A to B,
and we provide, either directly or through a federated model, the
ability for people to use overseas infrastructure, but that is not
REANNZ's
responsibility at this stage.
Yeah. So anywhere's possible. If someone wants to send something somewhere, you'll
connect them.
As long as it's within the global community, and just noting the global
community is bound by sanctions, so there are certain countries that aren't
on the networks anymore because of international sanctions.
Yeah. I'll ask a question. So given there are so many different
places the data goes to, so how do you basically
monitor that the whole chain where the
data is going is protected for any cybersecurity kind of
attacks? What capabilities do you have to monitor that?
Yeah. So we do two things. So we can monitor through
the network records, we call them the flow reporting, where data goes.
We work closely with the other ones of us, so we know
what their cybersecurity posture is.
So we can
talk to members if need be, what that journey looks like in terms of a
cybersecurity approach. We also have a
lot of layers of cybersecurity on the REANNZ network nationally, and again, we
share that very much with our members.
The one thing to note is there's two types of traffic.
We've got two types of networks. There's the NREN
network, which is the global ecosystem.
That is where we have more control and visibility.
At certain points, we hand off to the general internet.
So it depends on the traffic, depends on the level of security.
And at a governance level, we monitor and
oversee and ensure as much
as is absolutely possible.
And as we all know from a cybersecurity standpoint,
you have to understand, monitor, and be
always
cognizant of
evolving threats. So we take cybersecurity very, very
seriously and we continue to monitor,
and we have a incredible team who
oversees that for our members, for our customers.
So if there is any security incident, does
that get reported to
whoever is the actual owner of that data?
We would, yes. So we haven't had one, but we would
report to the institution, and if we knew, it would be the
individual researcher, but definitely the institution.
Actually, I'm deputy chair on what's called the
Security Policy Alliance, and that is around sharing information
across the global community of
cyber threats as well. So we're trying to protect everyone with intel
across the whole ecosystem.
Robin Davidson. Yeah.
Yeah. Thank you.
So in the report, it talks about reduced
revenue via membership fees.
Mm-hmm.
And obviously, that's partly the CRI to
PRO transition that you've talked about earlier.
Also, the disestablishment of Te Pūkenga.
So we won't go into the
intricacies and opinions on that at this end, or certainly from my perspective.
Just focused on this year.
But as the chair has suggested, if we're focused on this year,
what are the impacts on the affordability and sustainability of your
services as a result of those changes?
Yeah. It's a very good question.
There's no buckets of service. So from the network side, we are still
sustainable.
So it has reduced some margin that we were
making to invest in product development and things like that,
but it didn't mean we fell below sustainability for that core
service.From an HPC or a compute side of the
business,
again, we are stabilizing revenues, so we're
actually okay. But it does impact our ability to
invest in the future, so in the GPUs that we're looking at or
additional services.
So that's really the impact. It hasn't pushed us below a level of
concern.
So affecting your ability to invest in the future.
Mm-hmm.
There's a sliding scale probably on that statement as far as
it could be, we're very comfortable with our lack of ability to
invest in the future, through to in three years' time if it continues like this,
we'll be in real trouble.
Yeah. We're
not in the latter, we're in the former.
So REANNZ has an obligation to make enough money annually to
reinvest in our infrastructure. We're still meeting that obligation at the
moment.
It's key for us to keep
membership revenue static and constant as we can to give us that
certainty about the reinvestment model.
What we're looking at doing is we're looking at identifying opportunities where we
can grow and bring more people onto the infrastructure,
which then gives us the ability to invest in things like GPUs
and quantum and what have you.
So we've got one line on the ability to keep the
status quo going and keep it refreshed,
as determined by hardware refresh cycles.
And so have you been
asked to do or have you done any work about who else might come on as users,
especially given the shifts that we're seeing towards more services being able to
use this?
Yeah, absolutely. So we're talking very closely with the
GDDA.
We're a mandated entity under that, so we're talking to them about how we could
provide additional services. What we've done as part of that is we've looked
around the global ecosystem and seen
where other countries have used NREN capability in different
ways. So one of the obvious opportunities that we are
talking about is hospitals. So if you look overseas,
hospitals are often connected to what we call the NREN, and that's for two
reasons. One is the stability of the network allowing for file
transfer, so when you're looking at MRIs flitting around.
The other is the interface between the
teaching institutions, whether that's a polytechnic or a university,
and hospitals. There's a lot of students going back and forth,
and we have a lot of software and services that make that transition
between a tertiary institution and the network that's at a
hospital, or hospital systems more streamlined.
So that's a key one that we're actively looking at.
The other one is around emergency services, and that's not
for emergency response. That's not what we do.
But again, we have federated services that are designed and used
overseas to allow
multidisciplinary response teams to stand up
really quickly and work together at remote locations.
So there's opportunities there for us,
and that's what we're talking about. Equally, there's government departments.
We're innovation, so you've got Department of Conservation, you've got
MPI, you've got MB. You've got all of these standard
departments that have
mandates that align with our purpose.
We do have Ministry of Education on as a member currently.
Mm-hmm.
So there's a big opportunity. Mm.
Yeah. Those sound like massive opportunity.
Mm-hmm.
Even one of those could help us for example.
Yeah, exactly.
Sounds big to me.
Yeah.
So,
that's exciting, the potential, but it
also comes back to that capacity, and that was the point right at the beginning
about empty
glass.
Empty pipes.
Yeah.
Yeah. And we've done that modeling. So there's two bits to the capacity.
One is,
if we look at our national capacity, we have the ability to dial that up
really quite easily. It's a call to AEON and we can, a simple process
to increase it if we need to. You'll have seen in the response, we
have excess capacity on the Hawaiki cable,
and that's from Auckland to the US and Australia.
That's prepaid for and that lease agreement allows
available capacity to step up dramatically over the life of the
contract. So what we would expect we would do
is we would probably increase capacity nationally, and the additional
traffic would be used to absorb some of the currently excess
capacity on the Hawaiki
link.
So we'd need to understand their traffic patterns.
Sure. And so I guess
if you're able to manage
new users, new members,
what happens if they all come at
once? What's your ability to really rapidly scale up?
Good problem.
So, would be a nice problem to have.
Yeah.
Look, there's a couple of things to think about just to
put this conversation in context.
Network-wise, that's fine. We did look at Te Whātua Ora and thought we might need
to bring one or two network engineers on.
The key point to note is we're a business-to-business
model,
so as long as we're not suddenly required to support a
whole lot of end users,
we can scale relatively straightforward.
The investment and staff become in service management to manage the
contract and any of the reporting and relationship requirements
that might come with it. But from our technical staff, we don't think it's
too huge a step up on top of what we do today based
on what we know. So we do need to do more work with the entities, but the
opportunity is definitely there.
Yeah. Thank you.
I would add just a couple of things to that.
Firstly, we
have just recently undertaken
a business modeling exercise to ensure that we can scale
and made a couple of adjustments on that basis.
And that was following on from our integration of NeSI from Auckland
University into REANNZ, which came in at one
July of 2025. That,
I think, sets the organization up very well
for exponential scale and growth, and we're very
cognizant of the fact that we have an
underlying asset that could be utilized across all of New Zealand for the good of
New Zealand. And then secondly, strategically,
and following on from what Amber said earlier, we take very
seriously our responsibility as a
technology and innovation organization.
And based on that, it's very important that we are up to
date,
that we eat our own dog food, so to speak, that we really do
embed and be as automated, as
efficient as what you would want and expect from an
organization like ours. And that's too, I think,
an area which could be utilized across New
Zealand more,
and we'd welcome that. Mm-hmm. That's great. Thank you so much.
Yeah, and there might be some follow-up questions.
If that's the case, you will be contacted. Thank you.
Great. Thank you very much